---
sidebar_position: 1
---
# GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE

# GNU通用公共许可证

Version 1, February 1989

第1版，1989年2月

    Copyright (C) 1989 Free Software Foundation, Inc.  
    51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301, USA

    版权所有 (C) 1989 自由软件基金会
    51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA

    Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
    of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

    任何人都可以复制和发布本许可证的完整副本，但不允许修改。

## 译者声明

This is an unofficial translation of the GNU General Public License into Chinese. It was not published by the Free Software Foundation, and does not legally state the distribution terms for software that uses the GNU GPL--only the original English text of the GNU GPL does that. However, we hope that this translation will help Chinese speakers understand the GNU GPL better.

本译文是GNU通用公共许可证的一份非官方中文翻译，并非自由软件基金会所发表，不适用于使用GNU通用公共许可证发布的软件的法律声明——只有GNU通用公共许可证英文原版才具有法律效力。不过我希望本翻译能够帮助中文读者更好地理解GNU通用公共许可证。

You may publish this translation, modified or unmodified, only under the terms at <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/translations.html>.

仅在遵循 <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/translations.html> 中的条款时，你才可以经过修改地或者不经过修改地发布本译文。

### Preamble

### 引言

The license agreements of most software companies try to keep users at
the mercy of those companies. By contrast, our General Public License
is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software--to make sure the software is free for all its users. The
General Public License applies to the Free Software Foundation's
software and to any other program whose authors commit to using it.
You can use it for your programs, too.

大部分软件的许可证都是被设计成剥夺你分享和修改的自由。相反，GNU通用公共许可证的目的是保护你分享和修改自由软件的自由——确保软件对所有用户都是自由的。本通用公共许可证适用于自由软件基金会的大部分软件以及任何作者承诺使用该许可证的软件（自由软件基金会的其他一些软件受GNU宽松通用许可证的保护）。你也可以将本许可证用于你的程序。

When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price. Specifically, the General Public License is designed to make
sure that you have the freedom to give away or sell copies of free
software, that you receive source code or can get it if you want it,
that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new free
programs; and that you know you can do these things.

自由软件，强调自由，而非免费。具体来说，设计通用公共许可证的目的是确保你有给予或者销售自由软件的自由，确保你想要得到自由软件时可以接收源代码或得到自由软件的自由，确保你可以修改自由软件或将其中的代码片段用于新软件的自由，并确保有知情权。

To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.
These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if
you distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

为了保护你的权利，我们设置了一些限制条件，以防止其他人否认你的权利或者要求你放弃这些权利。当你分发软件的副本或者修改软件时，这些限制则变成了你的责任。

For example, if you distribute copies of a such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that
you have. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code. And you must tell them their rights.

例如，如果你分发某个软件的副本，无论是免费的还是收费的，你必须将你拥有的这些权利赋给接收者。你要确保他们也能收到或者可以获得源代码，你必须告诉他们他们的权利。

We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

我们通过两步保护你的权利：（1）声明软件版权，（2）给你许可，该许可赋予你复制、分发和修改软件的权利。

Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software. If the software is modified by someone else and passed on,
we want its recipients to know that what they have is not the
original, so that any problems introduced by others will not reflect
on the original authors' reputations.

另外，为了保护每个作者和我们自己，我们要确保每个人都理解该自由软件是没有任何保证的。如果软件被某人修改并发分发，我们想让接收者明白他们收到的不是原始版本，因此其他人引入的问题不会影响原作者的声誉。

The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

下文是关于复制、分发和修改的详细条款和条件。

### GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE

### GNU通用公共许可证

### TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION

### 复制、分发与修改条款和条件

**0.** This License Agreement applies to any program or other work
which contains a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may
be distributed under the terms of this General Public License. The
"Program", below, refers to any such program or work, and a "work
based on the Program" means either the Program or any work containing
the Program or a portion of it, either verbatim or with modifications.
Each licensee is addressed as "you".

**0.** 本许可协议适用于任何版权人声明根据通用公共许可证的程序或者其他作品。下文中的“程序”是指“程序”或者“作品”，或者根据程序构建的衍生作品。程序是指本程序或者包含部分本程序的作品，无论是逐字复制还是修改的。每个被许可人都指“你”。

**1.** You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this General Public License and to the absence
of any warranty; and give any other recipients of the Program a copy
of this General Public License along with the Program. You may charge
a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy.

**1.** 你可以通过任何媒介复制和分发你收到软件源代码，前提是在你在每份副本上明显地发布合适的版权声明和免责声明，保留通用公共许可证全部声明和免责声明，并将通用公共许可证的副本连同程序一起提供给接收者。你可以发布副本的实际行为收费。

**2.** You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any
portion of it, and copy and distribute such modifications under the
terms of Paragraph 1 above, provided that you also do the following:

**2.** 你可以修改你的一个或者多个程序的副本或者任何部分，在满足第1条的前提下分发你的修改，前提是你还执行下列操作。

**a)** cause the modified files to carry prominent notices stating
that you changed the files and the date of any change; and

**a)** 使修改后的文件带有明显的声明，说明所有修改的任何文件和日期。并且

**b)** cause the whole of any work that you distribute or publish,
that in whole or in part contains the Program or any part thereof,
either with or without modifications, to be licensed at no charge to
all third parties under the terms of this General Public License
(except that you may choose to grant warranty protection to some or
all third parties, at your option).

**b)** 将你分发或者发布的全部程序，无论该程序整体或者部分修改或未修改的软件，根据通用公共许可证条款免费许可给第三方（你可以选择向部分或者全部第三方保修，选择权在你）
  
**c)** If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
when run, you must cause it, when started running for such interactive
use in the simplest and most usual way, to print or display an
announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a notice
that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide
a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under these
conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this General
Public License.

**c)** 如果修改后的软件在运行时通常以交互的方式读取命令，你必须在让程序进入交互模式时打印或者显示合适的版权声明和免责声明（或者，你也可以提供品质保证），并且告诉用户可以在本约束下分发本软件，告知用户如何查阅本许可证。

**d)** You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a
copy, and you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange
for a fee.

**d)** 你可以对你传递副本的实际行为收费，并且你可以通过提供保修换取费用。

Mere aggregation of another independent work with the Program (or its
derivative) on a volume of a storage or distribution medium does not
bring the other work under the scope of these terms.

仅将另一个独立作品与本软件（或者部分）存储或者分发介质上，不会将其他作品纳入这些条款的范围。

**3.** You may copy and distribute the Program (or a portion or
derivative of it, under Paragraph 2) in object code or executable form
under the terms of Paragraphs 1 and 2 above provided that you also do
one of the following:

**3.** 你可以根据第１条和第2条，以目标代码或者可以执行文件的格式复制或者分发软件（根据第２条，或者部分或者衍生）前提是你也执行下列操作：

**a)** accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Paragraphs 1
and 2 above; or,

**a)** 随软件完整的机器可读的源代码，必须根据上述第1条和第条2条分发；或者

**b)** accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
years, to give any third party free (except for a nominal charge for
the cost of distribution) a complete machine-readable copy of the
corresponding source code, to be distributed under the terms of
Paragraphs 1 and 2 above; or,

**b)** 随程序提供有效期至少3年的书面报价，向第三方提供（象征性收费的相应源代码除外）完整的机器可读的源代码的副本，在上述条款1和条款2下发布；或者

**c)** accompany it with the information you received as to where the
corresponding source code may be obtained. (This alternative is
allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you received
the program in object code or executable form alone.)

**c)** 随软件提供相关源代码的获取地址信息（仅但非商业分发并且你收到的是目标代码或者可执行程序格式时，才允许该替代方案）

Source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for making
modifications to it. For an executable file, complete source code
means all the source code for all modules it contains; but, as a
special exception, it need not include source code for modules which
are standard libraries that accompany the operating system on which
the executable file runs, or for standard header files or definitions
files that accompany that operating system.

作品的源代码是修改的首选形式。对于一个可执行文件，完整的源代码是指它包含的所有模块的所有源代码。但是，作为一个特殊例外，操作系统附带库，或者操作系统定义的头文件或者定义文件除外。

**4.** You may not copy, modify, sublicense, distribute or transfer
the Program except as expressly provided under this General Public
License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, distribute
or transfer the Program is void, and will automatically terminate your
rights to use the Program under this License. However, parties who
have received copies, or rights to use copies, from you under this
General Public License will not have their licenses terminated so long
as such parties remain in full compliance.

**4.** 除非本许可证明确规定，否则你不能复制、修改、再许可、分发或者传播本软件试图进行任何其他形式的复制、修改、再许可、分发或者传播本软件都是无效的，并且你在该许可下的权利都自动终止。但是，通过本许可从你那里收到副本和本软件权利的其他各方将不会终止许可，只有他们还完全遵守。

**5.** By copying, distributing or modifying the Program (or any work
based on the Program) you indicate your acceptance of this license to
do so, and all its terms and conditions.

**5.** 通过复制、分发或者修改本程序（或者基于本程序的衍生作品）表明你接受本许可证及其所有条款和条件。

**6.** Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on
the Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.

**6.** 你每次再分发本程序（或者基于本程序的衍生作品）时，接收者都自动从原始许可人获得许可，以根据许可条款和条件获得复制、分发或者修改本软件的权利。你不能对接收者增加任何限制。

**7.** The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new
versions of the General Public License from time to time. Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.

**7.** 自由软件基金会可能会不时发布通用公共许可证的修订版或者新版本。新的版本在理念上与当前版本类似，但是细节上可能有所不同，以解决新的问题或事项。

Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program
specifies a version number of the license which applies to it and "any
later version", you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that version or of any later version published by
the Free Software Foundation. If the Program does not specify a
version number of the license, you may choose any version ever
published by the Free Software Foundation.

**7.** 每个版本都有唯一的版本号。如果一个程序指定了具体的许可证版本号和“任何后续版本”，你可以选择遵循本版该或者自由软件基金会发布的后续版本。如果一个软件没有指定许可证版本号，你可以选择使用自由软件基金会发布的任何一个版本。

**8.** If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the
author to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the
Free Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we
sometimes make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the
two goals of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free
software and of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

**8.** 如果你将本程序的部分内容并入分发条件不同的其他作品中，请写信给作者获取授权。对于自由软件基金会授权的软件，写信给自由软件基金会；我们的决定将以两个目标为导向，保留自由软件和衍生作品的自由状态，并促进软件的普遍共享和重用。

**NO WARRANTY**

**免责声明**

**9.** BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO
WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.
EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR
OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE
PROGRAM IS WITH YOU. SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME
THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

**9.** 本软件免费许可，因此在适用法律范围内不提供品质保证。除非另有书面声明，本软件著作权人和/或其他作者按“原样”提供本软件，不提供任何形式的显示的或隐式的品质保证，包括但不限于经济价值和适合特定用途的保证。本软件的全部品质和性能风险均由你承担。如果本软件出现缺陷、你将承担所有必要服务、修复和更正的成本。

**10.** IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN
WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY
AND/OR REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU
FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE
PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING
RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A
FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS), EVEN IF
SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGES.

**10.** 在任何情况下，除非适用的法律要求或者书面协议，任何版权方和/或任何按照上述条款修改或/和分发本软件的第三方都不对你的损失负责，包括任何一般的、特殊的、偶发的或者重大损失（包括但不限于因你或者第三方，或操作不当、或无法与其他软件错误协同造成的数据丢失，数据失真、失效），即使那些持有方或者其他人已被告知此类损失的可能性。

### END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

### 条款和条件结束

### Appendix: How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

### 附录：如何将上述条款应用于你的新程序

If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to humanity, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these
terms.

如果你开发了一个新程序，并且希望它最大限度地对人类有用，最好的办法就是将其作为自由软件，使得每个人都可以按照本许可证分发和修改。

To do so, attach the following notices to the program. It is safest to
attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

为此，最安全、最有效的办法是将如下的声明附在每个文件开头，以明确传达免责声明。每个文件应当最少包含一个“版权声明”和一个本许可证的完整声明。

    <one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of what it does.>
    Copyright (C) 19yy <name of author>

    （用一行标明程序的名称和作用。）

    版权所有（C） 年份  作者姓名

        This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
        it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
        the Free Software Foundation; either version 1, or (at your option)
        any later version.

        本程序是自由软件，你可以根据自由软件基金会发布的GNU通用许可证自由地再分发或者修改。本程序适用第１版或者后续版本（具体随你）。

        This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
        but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
        MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
        GNU General Public License for more details.
        
        我们希望本程序有用，但是不提供任何保证，甚至不保证它的经济价值或者适合特定目的。具体细节参加GNU通过公共许可证。

        You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
        along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
        Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
        
        你应该已经收到了本软件和一份GNU GPL的副本，如果没有请写信给自由软件基金会：
        675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper
mail.

同时提供能够联系你的电子邮件或者纸质邮件地址。

If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this
when it starts in an interactive mode:

如果本程序是交互的，让它在交互模式启动前输出如下的简短声明：

    Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) 19xx name of author Gnomovision
    comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'. This is
    free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain
    conditions; type `show c' for details.

    Gnomovision 第69版，版权所有（C）年份 作者姓名   

    Gnomovision不提供任何品质保证，输入“show w”查看详情。本软件是自由软件，欢迎你根据许可条件再分发，输入“show c”查看详情。

The hypothetical commands \`show w' and \`show c' should show the
appropriate parts of the General Public License. Of course, the
commands you use may be called something other than \`show w' and
\`show c'; they could even be mouse-clicks or menu items--whatever
suits your program.

假设的命令`show w`和`show c`用于显示通用公共许可证相应的内容。当然，你也可以使用`show w`和`show c`之外的其他命，甚至点击鼠标或者菜单项等——任何适合你程序的方式。

You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or
your school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program,
if necessary. Here a sample; alter the names:

如有必要，你还应该得到你的雇主（如果你是一名程序员）或者学校（如果有的话）签署该本程序的放弃版权声明。如下例所示（你需要修改名字）：

    Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright interest in the program
    `Gnomovision' (a program to direct compilers to make passes at
    assemblers) written by James Hacker.

    Yoyodyne有限公司声明放弃James Hacker所写的“Gnomovision”（编译通过的程序）的版权权益。

    <signature of Ty Coon>, 1 April 1989
    Ty Coon, President of Vice

    <Ty Coon 的签名>，1989 年 4 月 1 日
    Ty Coon，副总裁

That's all there is to it!

全文结束。

--------------------------

翻译：赵振华 <zhao.zhenhua@gmail.com>

发布日期：202３年1月2３日

地址：<https://github.com/zRich/gpl/blob/main/gplv１/gplv１.pdf>

如有修改建议欢迎发邮件或者到<https://github.com/zRich/gpl>讨论。

参考：

[简体中文译本] <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0-translations.html>
